Barack Obama be a Columbia University JD
Harvard Law School instructor in
constitutional law the University of
Chicago are you impressed our guest
today
Thomas Sol is not uncommon knowledge now
[Music]
welcome to uncommon knowledge I'm Peter
Robinson be sure to visit us on our
website at Hoover o RG /uk or on
facebook at facebook.com slash UNC
knowledge facebook.com slash UNK
knowledge a fellow at the Hoover
Institution economist dr. Thomas Sol is
the author of more than two dozen books
including the classic work conflict of
visions
dr. Souls latest intellectuals and
society a revised and expanded version
of the original bestseller Tom Sol
welcome thank you segment one what's
wrong with the intellectuals Tom to
quotations writing in 1981 historian
Arthur Schlesinger jr. who attended
Phillips Exeter and Harvard and held
positions as a professor at Harvard and
later at the City University of New York
Arthur Schlessinger Jr quote those in
the u.s. who think the Soviet Union is
on the verge of economic and social
collapse are only kidding themselves
close quote quotation number two
speaking in 1982 only months after
Arthur Schlesinger jr. Ronald Reagan a
graduate of Eureka College in an ironic
sense Carl Marx was right we are
witnessing today a great revolutionary
crisis a crisis where the demands of the
economic order are conflicting directly
with those of the political order but
the crisis is happening not in the free
non-marxist West but in the home of
sister Leninism the Soviet Union it is
the soviet union that runs against the
tide of history by denying human freedom
and human dignity to its citizens it
also was in deep economic difficulty Tom
the professional exquisitely educated
intellectual Arthur Schlessinger jr. got
it wrong and Ronald Reagan the graduate
of a little school in the middle of the
country Eureka College got it right a
decade after these two quotations the
Soviet Union went out of existence how
come well other Schlesinger is part of a
long and one might say distinguished
line of people who have been absolutely
wrong uh for decades and and since and
he actually for centuries so this is
just one of many statements that you
could prove it's not even the only time
that author Schlesinger jr. was wrong by
miles he was wrong and attributing the
recoveries from the Great Depression to
Franklin D Roosevelt he was wrong and
arguing that the tax cuts were going to
make it but under Andrew Mellon we're
going to make it harder to a balanced
budget they've not only balanced the
budget they had a surplus and paid down
the national debt and even after john
kennedy's tax cuts Treasury secretary
Andrew Mellon when Andrew Mellon was
earlier oh but in writing about and
writing retrospectively about it he said
he said that Mellon was very
inconsistent and saying he wanted to
reduce the national debt while cutting
the tax rate right when he cut the tax
rate but they were tax revenue is
increased so Arthur Schlessinger was
wrong about the tax cuts of the 20s yes
and then when he served in the Kennedy
White House he resisted those tax cuts
which also worked and then he opposed
Ronald Reagan's he was thrown three
times so what is the what is the
pathology of intellectuals that I mean
one condensation and unfair crude
condensation but it sort of gets at a
point of this book might be simply the
fancier at your education the more
likely you are to be wrong
well you more like but I would say
there's something to that because the
more like
you are to spout off about things you
don't know anything about the product
the problem is that all of us have
having never arranged within which we
may be great but a few steps outside
that range and we're totally lost you
know Bobby Fischer that didn't go around
commenting you know on on theories of
evolution and stuff like that he was
happy to play chess I'm but
intellectuals someone who's a linguist
like Nam Chomsky he does he didn't stick
to linguistics if he stuck to
linguistics we would never people would
never have heard of it so somehow or
other a fancy education seems to give
people the feeling that they have been
given the diploma gives them permission
to spout off about world affairs
politics economics when all they know is
linguistics or Arthur Schlessinger
juniors case he knows a lot about the
administration of Andrew Jackson yes
fifty years before why what is it about
having a fancy diploma that gives people
the right not always oh it's all just
just the general reputation of being an
intellectual and you don't have to go
that far away I mean you know a couple
of years ago there was a mountain lion
killed here in Palo Alto and all kinds
of insane things was said by people at
Stanford and whatnot but how terrible it
was the killers mountain lion he was up
in a tree near with school where school
was what was about to let out was about
to let out yet the cops had been
watching it all day a tree in a
neighborhood and when the school was
about to let out they thought we have no
choice maybe people who may have been
you know I may have been the world's
authority is on existentialism or Mayan
culture or whatever they know nothing
about not lions and the cops have had to
deal with this before and they do know
something about mountain lions opposing
social visions intellectuals in society
quote at the heart of the social vision
prevalent among contemporary
intellectuals is the belief that there
are problems and solutions
yes quote explain that well the people
with the vision of the anointed as I
call it believe there are solutions and
that intellectuals have the inside track
in providing those solutions
those were the opposite vision of
understand there are no solutions there
are trade-offs
and you know you can make this a little
bit better by making something a little
bit worse or you can make it a little
bit better by making something a lot
worse and that right now for example
this mania for high-speed rail there's
no question if you're willing to pour
enough money down a rat hole we can have
high-speed rail we can't have it they
have it in Spain one of the economics
professors in Spain said you know not
only are they not covering the operating
costs there has not been one dollar
collected towards the infrastructure I
mean like the rails and the trains they
haven't got one dollar the paper that
they're not even covering the cost of
running the trains on a daily basis you
know the conductors and the electricity
so you've got in intellectuals in
society you draw this contrast between
what you call the vision of the anointed
we the anointed because of our intellect
our superior I'm I'm denigrating the
view because I share your view that it's
all nonsense but it's not nonsense to
them so what's the fair way to put it
what is it laya they have more knowledge
than other people we know more than most
much dryer for we are in a position to
serve a society see specific problems
and propose solutions
that's one fundamental vision which runs
through much of Western civilization as
you demonstrate here and the opposing
vision is common sensical tragic you
can't solve certain problems we will all
die there is a human beings are in some
ways perverse this would be the vision
you argue of the founding fathers you
check ambition with ambition
checks-and-balances power is dangerous
so why is it if you've got these two
fundamental visions the vision of the
anointed and the tragic vision of life
and they run through much of Western
civilization why is it the envision of
the anointed that is the persistent
temptation of intellectuals why are they
drawn to it gives them a much bigger
role in the world I mean if you believe
in free markets what about all these
people who want to have social justice
people just go out there they make
whatever deals they won't can with each
other work things out and go on their
way and though here is all is unused
brilliant standing on the sidelines
watching with impotent rage
the tragic vision confines intellectuals
to the classroom the vision of the
anointed lets them run society that's
the difference roughly so what you're
saying is that it's just human pride
it's it's it's the kind of vulgar urge
to power oh absolutely and nothing more
than that well that's a sufficient for
many people oh all right
segment to the role of intellectuals in
American life intellectuals in society
quote there has probably never been an
era in history when intellectuals have
played a larger role in society than the
era in which we live close quote how
come well for one thing for most of
history you had autocratic governments
you had Kings got improves and so on and
then and they were and what the people
thought didn't matter an awful lot on a
democracy what the people think matters
a lot and so and also in later times you
have a more prosperous society where we
can afford from a financial point of
view to send more and more people
through colleges and universities and
turn and support books and things like
that much more so than in the past and
now you have people out there who
fundamentally don't really know much
beyond what they especially might be
creating a certain vision of life in the
electorate which the people with the
holders of power have to take into
account so the intellectuals are able to
[Music]
dominate perhaps is the word the climate
of opinion yes in a republic of 300
million people yes and well what classic
example was the era between the two
world wars where the intellectuals were
all in favor of disarmament even while
Hitler was arming Germany and when Japan
was lobbying and so forth they were
saying we should disband the RAF to
British some British intellectuals and
so on and and and and it was not that
they convinced the holders of power
the whole is the power power understood
that Germany was rearming secretly even
before Hitler took power you make this
point Stanley Baldwin then the British
prime minister
yes saw what Hitler was up to oh yeah
then the British and French intelligence
services both knew this the public
didn't notice and Baldwin was not about
to tell the British public a Germany was
rearming because the clear implication
was that Britain must be rearm and the
intellectuals had made rearmament you
know poison politically and his
professional opinion is it as a working
politician was that the climate of
opinion was such that the that British
British democracy couldn't bear the
truth that's right because of what the
intellectuals had done to yes through
journals and newspapers and the
chattering classes so to speak and what
about Vietnam
oh my gosh that the Tet Offensive was
hailed by the intellectuals as a huge
defeat for the American military forces
after the Communists took over won the
war took took took over South Vietnam
Tet Offensive is 68 if the Communists
finally win in 73 yeah the communist
leaders himself said they were
devastated by the Tet Offensive they
never want a military battle against
American forces the whole time the
Vietnam War went on but in the
newspapers
the Tet Offensive was depicted as a
great defeat for the United States so
Lyndon Johnson and the military
conducting the war in Vietnam knew that
we had in effect that we had won not in
effect one that we had won that
engagement the Tet Offensive the
Communists knew everybody knew except
intellectuals everybody and Lyndon
Johnson instead of prosecuting the war
is forced to announce toward the end of
1968 that he is not going to run for
re-election that's the moment when
America effectively surrenders in
Vietnam yes because the climate of
opinion got the it because the
intellectuals got things wrong they
dominated the climate of opinion and
that if in a democracy if the people
believed the war is unwinnable then it's
unwinnable intellectuals in society
ideological differences based on beliefs
about facts causation
human nature and the character and
distribution of knowledge are ultimately
questions about different perceptions of
the real world leading to hypotheses
which can be tested empirically close
quote now everybody who's been to
college and high school knows that what
you've just described is is the
intellectual method you come up with a
hypothesis and you test it against
reality and yet you argue here that the
least interested in actual empirical
tests testing hypothesis testing ideas
against reality our intellectuals
because them there are many talents that
they have a huge ego stake in a given
set of conclusions in other words it's
very I symmetrical I mean if you believe
in free markets and you know traditional
values and so forth there is no
exaltation that comes with that you're
just somebody believes in free markets
and traditional values on the contrary
there's a certain humility that comes
with it yes look the market knows more
than I do
yeah the traditional moral wisdom of the
ages knows more than I do you humble
yourself before the wider world right
yes okay but but but if you believe in
social justice and saving the
environment you know I mean you are
really something and so they the people
with that viewpoint have a huge ego
stake there and empirical evidence is
like gambling all of that on a roll of
the dice okay they don't want to test
for fear that they might be proven wrong
yeah they don't want to know the answer
again intellectuals in society quote
intellectuals on issues ranging across
the spectrum from policy housing
policies to laws governing organ
transplants have sought to have
decision-making discretion taken from
those directly involved who have
personal knowledge and a personal stake
and transfer to third parties who have
neither and who pay no price for being
wrong
close quote so again this this counter
common sense you know what's best for
your health therefore we must make the
decision in a bureaucracy in Washington
that's right
hey well have you been told all your
life and many of these people have from
an early age they were in the class four
bright gifted children they were the
ones who got into the good high schools
they were the ones who were accepted in
colleges that accept the less than ten
percent of the applicants that they've
heard this all through their lives and
after a while they must and all due
modesty believe it all right
the percentage of cabinet appointments
with experience in the private sector
the administration of Dwight Eisenhower
almost 60% George W Bush over 50 percent
Barack Obama barely twenty percent yes
what are we to make of this but that
there is a reason why things have
declined the way they have that people
who had so have a track record
encountering a fellow who had been a
teaching as a fellow at Harvard when I
was an undergraduate and I said to him
I've been noticing that whenever there's
a great disaster there always needs to
be a Harvard man in the middle of it he
said have you noticed that - yeah you
know I mean think of McNamara and the
whiz kids and the Vietnam War you know
think of the Ford Foundation who was the
Harvard man in charge of that I think
she was Bundy sounds right yeah you know
he launched this whole notion of
subsidizing community activists as the
answer to the racial problems of course
they have every community activists have
every incentive to exacerbate the
problem to the to the fullest
I mean calm would be the end of their
job so why I'm just still trying to get
at this contrast between the growing
role of America of intellectuals in
American life which is taking place not
only in our lifetime but in the lifetime
of somebody who's in college this very
day you can see it expanding over the
last quarter of a century or so why
should that be taking place now why
should the why should intellectuals have
a growing role and why should the nature
of intellectuals have changed if you
look at the founders
Thomas Jefferson John Adams quite
different characters and temperaments
these were both extremely well read John
Adams was a Harvard man and yet you
don't get what you get
I would argue and I think you'd agree
but I put it to you you get the sense
over and over again particularly in
Adams you get it in John in Washington
you certainly get it in the
constitutional debates
it's the tragic vision of life oh no
question power is dangerous we need to
hem this in we need to devolve as much
power as we can to ordinary people now
why is it that the founders should have
grasped that and intellectuals today
just don't see it at all well first of
all these people did not make their
living as intellectuals they did not
make their living units politicians most
of them most of them had they had day
jobs and when the rebellion against
Britain started they they put that aside
for them for the time being to go into
politics and to try to write up a
constitution and all those kinds of
things but they were not intellectuals
in the sense in which I define it as
people who earn their living by
producing a final product which is
simply ideas right segment three
intellectuals condescending
intellectuals in society quote
intellectuals give people who have the
handicap of poverty the further handicap
of a sense of victimhood yes close quote
explain that Tom the expo and elections
have a great tendency to see poverty as
a great moral problem to which they have
the solution now the human race began in
poverty so there's no mysterious
explanation as to why some people are
poor the question is why if some people
gotten prosperous and in particular why
have some gotten prosperous to a greater
degree than others but everybody started
poor so poverty is not a mystery to be
solved by intellectuals more than that I
think one one of the things I wish I put
more emphasis on in the book is that
intellectuals have no interest in and
what creates wealth and what inhibits
the creation of wealth they are very
concerned about the distribution of it
but they act as if wealth just exists
somehow and it's only a question it's
like manna from heaven it's only a
question of how we split it up
and why should that be why shouldn't
they find that question at least
intellectually fascinating because it
would destroy the whole vision that they
have because it would lead to the answer
of free markets well it would it would
say there are enormous numbers of
reasons why people acquire the ability
to create wealth and they vary all over
the world and so if you find for example
that in centuries past Germans living in
Eastern Europe had much higher standards
of living than the indigenous peoples of
Eastern Europe intellectuals and say
well the Germans have somehow oppressed
the people of Eastern Europe right or
the ones who are into genetic
determinism say Germans were born
biologically superior of people of
Eastern Europe but anyone with a
knowledge of history would know that
there are all kinds of reasons why
Western Europe as a whole has far
greater wealth to be producing capacity
than Eastern Europe but of course that
would then cut out the role of
intellectuals they would then have to do
what David Hume did which is wait oh he
urged his fellow eighteenth-century
Scots to learn the English language
because that would open up a whole world
to them that they would not have
otherwise which leads to another
quotation that I found very striking
here Tom and intellectuals in society
part of this you've touched on you write
that although intellectuals pay a lot of
attention to inequalities among racial
and ethnic groups quote seldom has this
attention been directed toward how the
less economically successful might
improve themselves by availing
themselves of the culture of others
around them close quote
now that is a very arresting formulation
poor people can improve themselves by
availing themselves of a culture of
others around them what do you mean by
that I mean that the same things which
allows some other people to prosper can
allow them to prosper if they take
advantage of those same things the Scots
were a classic example they were one of
the poorest and most ignorant people on
the fringes of European civilisation and
centuries past
but once they for whatever reasons began
to educate themselves
especially to learn the English language
which became a patient he built all over
Scotland including human himself we're
taking lessons in the English language
Humes first language was Gaelic he I
don't know if his Gillian was whatever
they spoke in those day alright yeah uh
uh and and and with and from about the
middle of the eighteenth century to the
middle of the nineteenth century
the leading intellectuals in Britain
were Scots right I mean you had Adam
Smith in economics humans and human
philosophy black in chemistry you go
through the whole list and so they could
do that but that was an extremely rare
thing for an intellectual to say most
intellectuals in most countries around
the world see the issue is how those who
are more prosperous should be brought
down rather than how it and add more
with the people people who have lagging
should cling to their culture I don't
know how you're going to keep on doing
what you've always done and get results
that are different from what you've
always gotten to quotations Tom an
editorial in the New York Times quote
racial stereotypes still wreak havoc
with the job possibilities of young
black men close quote
quotation number two thomas soul and
intellectuals in society quote black
unemployment rates were lower than those
of whites as long ago as 1890 close
quote and in 1930 as well and in
nineteen thirty first of all black
unemployment was lower decades ago
before the civil rights movement before
the New York Times began editorializing
on the on black poverty how can that
have been it it shows them one outlet
well the minimum wage law is one one
huge factor 1930 was also the last year
when there was no federal minimum wage
law if you look at the unemployment rate
of black teenagers in 1948 1949 it is a
fraction of what it has been at any of
recent decade uh and 1949 was a
recession year so the black teenage
unemployment rate in 1949 was a fraction
of what it
was and even the most prosperous years
of the 1990s and this is because the
federal minimum wage said you must play
pay every worker at least this month yes
when there was no minimum wage kids
everybody but particularly you're
talking about black teams you could get
paid whatever a dollar fifty an hour
they'll agree but they could get
employment they could yeah learning
skills they could get reached the first
rung on the ladder so to speak yes and
be able move up very quickly I'm in
McDonald's has over a hundred percent
turnover a year people's like he's out
you're he's out flipping hamburgers
yes he's flipping hamburgers in January
does not mean he's going to be flipping
hamburgers in December somewhere how to
get to work on time and get him that's
right he's and he's not gonna be at me
he's gonna start start up the ladder but
the what was different about the late
1940s was the minimum the federal minute
the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938
specified what the minimum wage would be
the runaway inflation of the 1940s made
that number meaningless so for all
practical purposes inflation had
repealed the minimum wage law thank God
I was a teenager in those years and you
know when I started out my first
full-time job is a Western Union
messenger my starting pay was fifty
percent above the federal minimum wage
because inflation had made the federal
minimum wage meaningless and so under
those conditions in 1948 black 16 and 17
year olds had at an unemployment rate
under 10 percent and slightly less than
that of white teenage is the same age
now as you come in and the Liberals say
no we we've got to catch up with
inflation
starting in nineteen fifty they
escalated the minimum wage regularly and
then you begin to see these horrendous
rates of unemployment among black
teenagers diversity again I'm quoting
from intellectuals in society quote
sweeping claims for the benefits of
diversity and innumerable institutions
have prevailed without a speck of
evidence being asked for or given close
quote yes
again how come intellectuals ought to be
asking so we have diversity we have
affirmative action diversity and of
course diversity is one of the sacred
words of the Academy these days
and nobody's tested to see whether the
mersa tea enriches yet and no you get no
it's just definitional intellectuals
have many skills which will enable them
to evade the testing of what they
believe and that negates the fact the
fact that they are capable of testing it
doesn't mean that they're going to test
it
Thomas Sol once again quote at the same
time you're getting all this melding of
diversity this is not from intellectuals
in society but it's from an interview
you gave elsewhere at the same time
you're getting all this melding of
diversity there's an extremely narrow
ideological conformity that's being
enforced so we have diversity in the way
people look the ethnic groups are from
which they come the parts of the country
from which they come but once you arrive
you'd better start thinking the way we
do yes I still get emails from students
you know say that you know when they
raise any issues that go against the
professor's ideology they just get
ridiculed segments for Thomas sole
intellectual we just learned that you
started out as a delivering telegrams
this was in New York this is yeah living
in Harlem so you were dilute you started
out to living now let's take you to age
24 when you're at Howard University you
write in to another book of well worth
reading they're all worth reading but I
love a personal Odyssey but I'm quoting
from a personal Odyssey in this case
quote I was a 24 year old high school
dropout with mediocre grades in a
mediocre institution close quote
when did that change when did your own
intellect become engaged when did the
light bulb go on Oh before then but of
course I was working during the day and
going to school at night which is not
the ideal conditions for you know
intellectual results so I really didn't
have the results so how so how did but
young Tom soul what what I can recall
you were telling me that you would wait
up at night as I believed that this was
when you were a teen you'd wait up at
night
for the early morning edition newspapers
do them out you've walk up this block at
a little after midnight and buy the
first edition newspapers at the
newsstand take them back to your bedroom
and read them yes how what would so you
were an intellectual when you were oh
I'm not sure they're reading the Yankee
school was majoring in the lovelessness
Yankee sports I feel so much better now
I thought you were engaged in world I've
always thought can you imagine anybody
in Harlem doing that today why we around
at midnight freely and with you as a
small old white man had a little
newsstand in Harlem and I would and he
obviously had enough people doing this
to make them better make it worth his
while to be open at midnight and I would
walk it was a long block I'd walk down
this long block get my newspapers and
come on back home and read him a
different world a quote again from a
personal Odyssey I graduated from
Harvard magna laude economics and
Karl Marx had a lot to do with it Karl
Marx got Tom's soul through Harvard
explain yourself explainers well IIIi
have been taken by the Marxist
philosophy and therefore I it's done a
lot of study I'm one of the few people I
guess who's read all three volumes of
capital and indexed them as I went and
from this I wrote a UH this meeting
takes place before you get to Harvard I
started but but at Harvard I got moments
with the capital and that then provided
me with a undergraduate honors thesis
and it's the honors thesis that got the
magnet cold log the grade point average
was just enough to make me eligible I
see and you enjoyed yourself at Harvard
and have revered that August institution
ever since is that correct
not quite I have I have never gone to a
class reunion at Harvard even when I was
teaching at Brandeis which is about a 20
minute drive from Harvard there were
what I saw there and that got that
bother me is what is what bothered me
ever since there was the sense that we
don't really need to test for evidence
if all we bright good fellows all
believe this it must be true mmm so
you've got the sense
and then have a sense of a kind of
intellectual priesthood or or cash yes
and then the same thing is your mission
from the from the book that there is
this sense that you don't really have to
go for evidence that you know these are
things that we all know thinking it so
makes it so from Harvard to a graduate
program in economics at the University
of Chicago quote I was as well aware
that the University of Chicago Economics
Department had a reputation for
conservatism as they were that I was a
Marxist what made this not matter was
that we were both devoted to
intellectual standards I developed much
more respect for the University of
Chicago than I ever had for Harvard
close quote
yes explain the difference in atmosphere
intellectual atmosphere well in Chicago
you had to make your arguments as
somewhat some economist once said you
know at Chicago economics is a
full-contact sport and I don't know if
you aware of the of the back and forth
that goes on it's fierce but the fact of
the matter is that everyone recognized
you have to have facts you have to have
logic you can't say that we believe this
because everybody knows this no you got
you got to show how and why and you
write about someone who became your
close friend Milton Friedman you studied
with Milton Friedman now so here's a
case Tom your thesis about intellectuals
in society that an intellectual is
someone whose end product is ideas
Milton's end product was ideas and yet
he resisted all the temptations that you
delineate in this book he championed the
free markets he was intensely suspicious
of the self aggrandizement of
intellectuals he loved Washington in
fact he there was I can recall some to
conversation never went anywhere but
some conversation here at the Hoover
Institution that we should move to
Washington and Milton said it would last
two years in new boo-boo-boo
intellectually we would be taken over
how did he the in strict terms a man of
ideas and in that sense an intellectual
is intellectual
what what set him apart what made him
different from the intellectuals in the
majority well in the preface of the book
I explained it I don't go into that that
I'm right out of you IIIi did not try to
explain every sparrows fall uh I'm
trying to find what are the general
patterns that we can see looking at
intellectuals over the past two
centuries and I specifically say Milton
Friedman is a classic example of someone
who did not do it that way although I
will be Milton himself somewhere pointed
out that at a very early period in his
life he was the Keynesian he was
slightly a liberal okay so well but but
he but he moved beyond that and a lot of
people do I would say most of the
conservative intellectuals were at some
point of their lives on the left
I mean Hayek was a socialist you go with
you but you can just go through the
whole list of them I mean there are a
few like William F Buckley who was a
conservative from day one but that he
was the exception not the rule
all right so if you won't explain the
sparrows fall in Milton's case explain
it in yours we've now got you to a
graduate program at the University of
Chicago but you're still a Marxist yeah
what were the circumstances what was the
intellectual journey that led you to
reject mark well it was not not taking
Milton Friedman's guy was a Marxist when
I went into Milton Friedman's course I
was a Marxist when I came out you are
just one tough Marxist business Milton
so what happened Tom I went to work for
the government as it as a summer intern
in economics and seeing the thinking or
lack of thinking it was going on in the
government I realized that government is
not where it's at so when you this ties
back to the notion of empiricism
against the reality yes of the
professional intellectual caste
attempting to rearrange the lives of
millions of people across this republic
you said to yourself it's mediocre and
second what was it that that you it was
truly unthinking it was also something
else that the labor department had its
own institutional interests I was
interested for example in whether the
minimum wage law caused unemployment uh
and I as I try to come up with ways of
testing that I realized that the people
in the labor department so that is a
threat I mean they were appalled
as I gave some ways we might try to test
this now they have no desire to test the
minimum wage law we've provided 1/3 of
the funding for the US Department of
Labor I see
and so you once you say the government
agencies have their own institutionally
interests so don't look for them to
serve the interests of others I mean to
me your question is are all these
teenage kids going to go out go without
jobs and end up on the street and in
crime and all the rest of it that was
not your top priority and I realized he
was the people's well-being would never
be the priority of politicians and
bureaucrats all right
after you leave a government service in
Washington you go back to academia where
you've had a long and extremely
distinguished career you've taught at
institutions that include Amherst and
Cornell and UCLA you've been a fellow at
the Hoover Institution at Stanford
University for some three decades now
and yet you've spent this time swimming
so to speak against that tide the
intellectual tide that you describe here
like just probing one more time and you
feel perfectly free to swap me down one
more time if you'd like
what made you different Tom what is it
in your character your background what
permitted you to to resist these
temptations to see them in the first one
like others I did not successfully
resist them at first but as time went on
and more and more evidence accumulated I
wasn't as prepared as some others were
to just keep explaining away all the
evidence so it's your impulse toward
empiricism let's test it yeah test it
let's test yes all right
segment 5 our intellectual in chief
Barak Obama got his BA from Columbia his
JD from Harvard he taught for a number
of years at the University of Chicago
Law School may I suppose that Tom soul
is duly impressed ha ha ha oh yeah you
might say the road to hell is paved with
the Ivy League degrees ha ha all right a
few clips of the President of the United
States delivering his State of the Union
address earlier the
here clip number one higher education
can't be a luxury it is an economic
imperative that every family in America
should be able to afford higher
education and imperative all he's asking
is that all young Americans should have
the same opportunity to get a really
good education that Tom's so all had Tom
I love the way the use of the word
opportunity uh you know I had as much
opportunity to become an NBA star as
Michael Jordan had it just happens that
there was some difference in skill and
so the same thing with education there
is no point trying to run people through
institutions that they have very little
interest in and that they may not be
suited for in fact I would argue that
one of the problems of American
education if you have a lot of people in
college we have no interest in what a
college is supposed to be nor is there
any reason why they should and so the
insula theme so you water down the
education of the people who are there to
get an education because of the people
who are not there for that purpose and
who and and there and who you trying to
appease in some way and is the impulse
that we just saw of Barack Obama and his
supporters to in constantly more and
more people run them through college run
the college and that's what that's to
enhance the standing of intellectuals in
society to teach more and more Americans
to defer to intellectuals is that part
of what's going on it's to win votes
frankly all right straight forward is
that President Obama once again I will
not cede the wind or solar or battery
industry to China or Germany because we
refuse to make the same commitment here
we've subsidized oil companies for a
century that's long enough
the tree is pre Solyndra of goods pre
Selena oh yeah this notion of picking
out something and calling a good thing
like education or affordable housing or
whatever it might be everything is a
matter of trade
good what what did the band say there
that he will not cede wind or solar or
baddest battery the battery industry to
China or Germany because we refuse to
make the same commitment
it's amazing that here is a man talking
about five different industries and none
of which he has the slightest experience
it up but because he has these degrees
in the places you mentioned he thinks
and people have told him how clever he
is he now thinks if he can can do this
so can you no human being on this planet
could do that can you explain Tom the
particular appeal to intellectuals of
the kind you describe here of the green
movement of the environmental movement
oh it shows them again in the roulade
relish there that they are the wise and
Noble
fortunate forcing the rest of us poor
dummies to do what's right you know even
though we don't want to so it's what
your old friend Karl Marx would have
described as the will to power yes all
right you don't want it you don't want
to cut them a little slide that's mean
you're just saying it's ego and pride
and vanity yes all right
ha ha once again the President of the
United States tax reform should follow
the Buffett Rule if you make more than a
million dollars a year you should not
pay less than 30% in taxes and my
Republican friend Tom Coburn is right
Washington should stop subsidizing
millionaires in fact if you're earning a
million dollars a year you shouldn't get
special tax subsidies or deductions on
the other hand if you make under
$250,000 a year like 98 percent of
American families your taxes shouldn't
go up I love it
Tom when people keep their own money
that's called subsidizing them I love it
yeah that's the brilliance of
intellectuals so they like they can use
words it's such a valuable way that they
can I mean the Obama has an absolute
talent for saying things that make no
sense but not only sound plausible but
inspiring you know something that we're
subsidizing the oil companies when they
deduct the cost of doing business in
order to arrive at the figure of how
much net income they have everybody does
that right so this notion though that if
you if you're rich you ought to pay more
straightforward enough no it is
straightforward us it's also
straightforward nonsense
why is that um people don't but they
often think of people who richest people
who happen to have money right extremely
few people happen to have money there
aren't that many Rockefellers it well
but Rockefeller didn't happen to have
money but his heirs happen to have it
yes my heirs happen to have money so
you're doing rocket rocket rockefeller
Rockefeller reduced the coils cost of
oil to a fraction of what it had been
before him benefiting millions of people
across the country
therefore they bought their oil from
rockefeller rather than from people who
had more expensive ways of producing oil
and except one of them being than the
use of tank cars on the railroads
they're progressives were or livid that
rockefeller
could ship his oil at a cheaper price
than the other producers it never
occurred to them in oil Rockefeller
shipped in oil and tank cars which are a
hell of a lot cheaper to transport than
in barrels I mean we still measure oil
and barrels today but we ship it in
tankers like and that's how he became a
multi billionaire so we know from the
study of economic history that wealthy
people get wealthy by creating jobs
lowering prices of yes products rather
that Bill Gates the richest man in
America one of the richest men in the
world invented in
invented an entire industry yes Lee
didn't all right we know all that
and we also know as we mentioned earlier
cutting taxes worked to spur economic
growth in the 20s again under John
Kennedy in the 6x actually the it was
Johnson who ended up most of the tax
cuts took plate that let's call it under
the 60s and then again in Ronald Ronald
Reagan and the George W Bush and George
W Bush so how is it that he can stand
there in the face of this overwhelming
evidence and be taken seriously I'm not
asking now about Barack Obama is an
intellectual I'm asking about the people
listening to him the that's the question
of the hour you have people who don't
stop and think you had dumb down
education you've had propagandistic
education and people he's what he's
saying connects with all those with all
those kinds of things all right in fact
it goes the other way too I was just
doing some research on Detroit and its
decline and they kept raising the city
income tax and every time they raise the
tax rate the tax revenues went down at
night in 2008 Charles Gibson right put
this to bomb when he was a candidate he
said why are you for raising the tax
rate on the rich because you often get
more revenue at lower tax rates than at
the higher tax rates and he said well
it's a question of social justice others
he doesn't really care about whether the
government raises more revenues if he
can get people mad at the rich and they
vote for him then the pot pop then it's
a success just as a Coleman Young's
policy is in Detroit were a great
political success for him mmm it ruined
Detroit but it didn't work just happy
you and I happen to be reading on a
similar subject from 1950 to the present
two things happened one was that the
population of the United States of
America roughly doubled and the other
was that the population of Detroit fell
by roughly half yes unbelievable all
right you write in intellectuals in
society about the intellectuals view of
diplomacy and military affairs one last
clip of the President of the United
States thank you that I'm sitting down
look at Iran through the power of our
diplomacy a world that was once divided
about how to deal with Iran's nuclear
program now stands as one the regime is
are isolated than ever before his
leaders are faced with crippling
sanctions and as long as they shirk
their responsibilities this pressure
will not relent Tom will you sleep
better tonight having heard that I mean
I may take a sleeping pill so I can
forget it the this man has diddle with
Iran to the point where we are the
military people saying you know even if
we decided winning and bomb that place
they are so dispersed so far underground
it's by no means clear that we can do it
the time when he was going through all
this wonderful diplomacy he talks about
was precise at the time when those
things were put underground and
dispersed it's like it's like when
Hitler was our army you know that as
Churchill said at one point a memorandum
could have stopped Hitler you know
because the power was so lopsided lay on
the side of the Western democracies I
say they could say stop rearming or else
and we can't do that with a did a look
they did a live with Iran to the point
where now we don't know now but there's
something interesting about to me
whereas with Social Policy intellectuals
tend to go for the policies and that
give them greater power what greater
power could an intellectual seek the
military power the power to blow things
up so why oh because oh oh because
because they believe that again that
their intellect is that is the unique
factor that it's going to save us and to
say that they're a bunch of military
people are going to be more effective
than doing all these terribly clever
things that Obama is doing undermines
their whole position I see all right
final couple of questions here I'm
asking I'm asking with a particular
viewer in mind let's say that there's a
young man or young woman in the position
of a Tom soul this is a birch if
somebody's viewing this who loves to get
online and read the early edition of the
newspapers the way you did and they want
to go to college and they may even dream
of grad school and they love books and
they love ideas but they don't want to
be
come an intellectual of the kind that
you described in intellectuals in
society so I've been thinking what are
the what is the advice that you would
give them and I think one would be
insist on empiricism is that right
always insist on testing theories
against the facts oh absolutely but in
terms of education that get to be very
careful in which college you choose and
you can't go according to big names you
go according to matching what you want
with what the college offers and
especially you don't want to go to a
college where the professors think that
the students are there to provide them
with an audience for indoctrination mmm
and there's one final we're talking here
about analysis and ideas and testing
ideas against reality and I can't resist
the feeling that there's an implicit
theme here you're pretty good at writing
what you want to say but I also sense a
kind of implicit theme here which is a
question of character almost a moral
theme of if what animates the
intellectuals is as fundamental as
simple vulgar human pride then kids
ought to pay a lot of attention to
intellectual humility is that so is that
a virtue that can be cultivated I I
don't know he can be cultivated but it's
hard to find for one thing but I but I
think that they shouldn't go to
someplace where there is a party-line
and and where anyone who says anything
different is just slap down and that's
unfortunately the case and to make
universities so you're looking for
genuine freedom of discussion yes and
you're looking for a willingness to test
theories against absolutely all right
last question we have an election coming
up in November what's your sense good
news or bad news at the unone we wake up
after election day will the
intellectuals have been triumphs have
triumphed or have been swept out of
Washington I would think that the odds
of there being swept out are no better
than 50/50 do you have a candidate as we
record this the Republic
primary is still grinding on primaries
are still grinding on I there's none of
them there there's none of the
candidates or either party that would
cause me to dance in the streets all
right
is there anything as you look at the
current prospect for this country in the
Western world that would cause you to
dance in the streets if I thought that
the voters had some sense of realism and
that they were concerned with the lower
the larger questions rather than whose
ex-wife said what and so on or you know
what Governor Romney did or did not do
when he was head of Bain Capital that I
would have if they had some sense of the
loss of freedom which is infinitely more
important than any of the specific
issues that by themselves that is
Obamacare really is a huge step towards
the loss of freedom I mean and it
happens in small ways that but
constantly I mean we can't have our
light bulb that we want in our own home
we can't flush the toilet with a kind of
toilet we want we can't take a shower
with the kind of showerhead we want we
can't put out garbage out except and
broken down by the way that some little
Gauleiters have decided we ought to do
it I mean it that it's just the
accretion of these things many of which
are too small to be significant in
themselves but in the aggregate you
could aggregate you can see the tenancy
list the people who think they know
better and they ought to be telling us
what to do those people are the danger
and if you don't see that then I'm not
sure what the what the future is going
to be like dr. Thomas sole author of the
new expanded and revised version of the
best-selling intellectuals and society
thank you thank you for uncommon
knowledge I'm Peter Robinson
[Music]